README.md, before:

# node-triton-metrics

This library provides a metrics manager to aid in collecting and exposing Triton service metrics.
It unifies the metric collection library, [artedi](https://github.com/joyent/node-artedi), 
and a Restify server that exposes those metrics in the [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) format.

# Install

```
npm install triton-metrics
```

# Examples

This library has only been tested with Restify 4.x, but may work with other versions.

Create the `MetricsManager` object:
```js
var createMetricsManager = require('triton-metrics').createMetricsManager;
var restify = require('restify') // This has only been tested with Restify 4.x

var metricsManager = createMetricsManager({
    address: config.address,
    log: config.log,
    staticLabels: {
        datacenter: config.datacenter,
        instance: config.instanceUuid,
        server: config.serverUuid,
        service: config.serviceName
    },
    port: config.port,
    restify: restify
});

```
Start the metrics server:
```js
metricsManager.listen(callback);
```
If you are measuring a restify server, a helper is provided to add restify related collectors to the `MetricsManager`:

```js
metricsManager.createRestifyMetrics();
```
These restify collectors include a counter that counts requests completed and a histogram that collects the time to process requests.
These metrics can be collected in the "after" hook of a restify server:
```js
var server = require('restify').createServer();
server.on('after', metricsManager.collectRestifyMetrics.bind(metricsManager));
```
To create custom collectors, add them to `MetricsManager#collector` according to the [artedi API](https://github.com/joyent/node-artedi/blob/master/docs/API.md):
```js
metricsManager.collector.counter({
    name: 'foo',
    help: 'foo help'
});

var labels = {
    bar: 'baz'
}

metricsManager.collector.getCollector('foo').increment(labels);

// or

counter.increment(labels);
```
In addition, metrics can be added to groups and can be collected with a user defined function:
```js
var counter = metricsManager.collector.counter({
    name: 'foo',
    help: 'foo help'
});

var histogram = metricsManager.collector.histogram({
    name: 'bar',
    help: 'bar help'
});

var collectMetrics = function(baz, num) {
    var labels = {
        baz: baz
    }

    counter.increment(labels);
    histogram.observe(num, labels);
}

metricsManager.createMetrics('arbitraryGroup', collectMetrics);
metricsManager.collectMetrics('arbitraryGroup', 'test', 42);
```
The server exposes a /metrics endpoint which returns the metrics in the Prometheus [v0.0.4 format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/master/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#format-version-004).

Example curl of the /metrics endpoint:

```shell
$ curl http://<address>:<port>/metrics

# HELP http_requests_completed count of requests completed
# TYPE http_requests_completed counter
http_requests_completed{route="getconfigs",method="GET",user_agent="restify/2.8.5",status_code="304",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_requests_completed{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
# HELP http_request_duration_seconds total time to process requests
# TYPE http_request_duration_seconds histogram
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.01"} 0
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.02"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.03"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.04"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.05"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.06"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.07"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.08"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.09"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{le="+Inf",route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds_count{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds_sum{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 0.011
```

# Usage

#### `createMetricsManager(options)`
Accepts an options object and returns a new `MetricsManager` object.

* `options` -- Object. All options are required.
    * `log`: A [bunyan](https://github.com/trentm/node-bunyan) logger.
    * `restify`: Restify library. Support is only guaranteed for version 4.x.
    * `staticLabels`: An object that includes labels to be attached to every collector.
        * `datacenter`: String, datacenter name.
        * `instance`: String, instance UUID.
        * `port`: Number, optional, metrics server port. Helpful when multiple instances of a service are running in the same zone.
        * `server`: String, server UUID.
        * `service`: String, service name.
    * `address`: String, the metrics server address.
    * `port`: Number, the metrics server port.

#### `MetricsManager.listen(callback)`
Starts the metrics server.

Parameters
* callback -- Function to run after the server has started

#### `MetricsManager.close(callback)`
Stops the metrics server.

Parameters
* callback -- Function to run after the server has stopped.

#### `MetricsManager.createMetrics(name, collectMetrics)`
Creates a group of metrics.

Parameters
* name -- String, a name to reference the metrics group.
* collectMetrics -- Function, accepts an arbitrary number of arguments and handles metric collection for the metrics group.

#### `MetricsManager.collectMetrics(name, ...args)`
Collects metrics for a metrics group.

Parameters
* name -- String, the name of the metrics group.
* ...args -- An arbitrary number of arguments to be passed to the `collectMetrics` function specified in `createMetrics`.

#### `MetricsManager.createNodejsMetrics()`
Adds several metrics indicating internal state of the node process. These
include:

* nodejs_V8_heap_size_executable_bytes
* nodejs_V8_heap_size_limit_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_available_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_heap_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_physical_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_used_heap_size_bytes
* nodejs_active_handles_count
* nodejs_active_requests_count
* nodejs_eventloop_lag_seconds_total
* nodejs_eventloop_max_lag_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_max_tick_count
* nodejs_eventloop_max_time_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_min_lag_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_min_tick_count
* nodejs_eventloop_min_time_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_samples_total
* nodejs_eventloop_tick_count_total
* nodejs_eventloop_time_seconds_total
* nodejs_gc_execution_count_total
* nodejs_gc_pause_seconds_total
* nodejs_memory_external_bytes
* nodejs_memory_heapTotal_bytes
* nodejs_memory_heapUsed_bytes
* nodejs_memory_rss_bytes
* nodejs_process_start_time_seconds
* nodejs_system_cpu_seconds_total
* nodejs_user_cpu_seconds_total

#### `MetricsManager.createRestifyMetrics()`
Adds a `restify` metrics group that includes common metrics to be collected from a Restify server -- a [counter](lib/metrics-manager.js#L119) to track http requests and a [histogram](lib/metrics-manager.js#L124) to track the time to process requests

#### `MetricsManager.collectRestifyMetrics(req, res, route)`
Collects `restify` metrics. Typically called in the "after" hook of a restify server.

Parameters
* req -- Restify request object.
* res -- Restify response object.
* route -- Restify route object.

These collectors collect the following metrics
* http_requests_completed
* http_request_duration_seconds

Both metrics add the following labels:
* method (e.g. 'PUT')
* status_code (e.g. 200)
* route (e.g. 'listvms')
* user_agent (only the first token e.g. restify/1.5.2) 

#### `MetricsManager.addPreCollectFunc(function (callback))`

Adds a function with the signature `function (callback)` to the list of
functions that will be called just before collecting the metrics. This is
intended to be used for things like `gauge.set(value)` to set a value just
before collection in cases where setting the value constantly might be otherwise
expensive.

The function provided *must* call callback() when completed *with no arguments*.

#### `MetricsManager#collector`
Artedi collector. Each metric needs to be added to this collector


# Development

There is automated code formatting (using `eslint --fix` and `prettier`):

    make fmt

There is lint/style checking (using `eslint` and `prettier --list-different`):

    make check

Please be sure to run all of the above prior to submitting changes. One
easy way to remember that is to run the following once for a clone to run
them automatically prior to `git commit`:

    make git-hooks

To run the test suite:

    make test

Commit message:

mark new metrics as experimental/uncommitted

README.md, after:

# node-triton-metrics

This library provides a metrics manager to aid in collecting and exposing Triton service metrics.
It unifies the metric collection library, [artedi](https://github.com/joyent/node-artedi), 
and a Restify server that exposes those metrics in the [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) format.

# Install

```
npm install triton-metrics
```

# Examples

This library has only been tested with Restify 4.x, but may work with other versions.

Create the `MetricsManager` object:
```js
var createMetricsManager = require('triton-metrics').createMetricsManager;
var restify = require('restify') // This has only been tested with Restify 4.x

var metricsManager = createMetricsManager({
    address: config.address,
    log: config.log,
    staticLabels: {
        datacenter: config.datacenter,
        instance: config.instanceUuid,
        server: config.serverUuid,
        service: config.serviceName
    },
    port: config.port,
    restify: restify
});

```
Start the metrics server:
```js
metricsManager.listen(callback);
```
If you are measuring a restify server, a helper is provided to add restify related collectors to the `MetricsManager`:

```js
metricsManager.createRestifyMetrics();
```
These restify collectors include a counter that counts requests completed and a histogram that collects the time to process requests.
These metrics can be collected in the "after" hook of a restify server:
```js
var server = require('restify').createServer();
server.on('after', metricsManager.collectRestifyMetrics.bind(metricsManager));
```
To create custom collectors, add them to `MetricsManager#collector` according to the [artedi API](https://github.com/joyent/node-artedi/blob/master/docs/API.md):
```js
metricsManager.collector.counter({
    name: 'foo',
    help: 'foo help'
});

var labels = {
    bar: 'baz'
}

metricsManager.collector.getCollector('foo').increment(labels);

// or

counter.increment(labels);
```
In addition, metrics can be added to groups and can be collected with a user defined function:
```js
var counter = metricsManager.collector.counter({
    name: 'foo',
    help: 'foo help'
});

var histogram = metricsManager.collector.histogram({
    name: 'bar',
    help: 'bar help'
});

var collectMetrics = function(baz, num) {
    var labels = {
        baz: baz
    }

    counter.increment(labels);
    histogram.observe(num, labels);
}

metricsManager.createMetrics('arbitraryGroup', collectMetrics);
metricsManager.collectMetrics('arbitraryGroup', 'test', 42);
```
The server exposes a /metrics endpoint which returns the metrics in the Prometheus [v0.0.4 format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/master/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#format-version-004).

Example curl of the /metrics endpoint:

```shell
$ curl http://<address>:<port>/metrics

# HELP http_requests_completed count of requests completed
# TYPE http_requests_completed counter
http_requests_completed{route="getconfigs",method="GET",user_agent="restify/2.8.5",status_code="304",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_requests_completed{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
# HELP http_request_duration_seconds total time to process requests
# TYPE http_request_duration_seconds histogram
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.01"} 0
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.02"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.03"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.04"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.05"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.06"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.07"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.08"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi",le="0.09"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds{le="+Inf",route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds_count{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 1
http_request_duration_seconds_sum{route="ping",method="GET",user_agent="curl/7.47.0",status_code="200",datacenter="coal",instance="83c07804-0ecf-460a-8cad-5b8b1cdbe1bc",server="564dc035-64a5-6420-88ce-59e1d1fbe100",service="sapi"} 0.011
```

# Usage

#### `createMetricsManager(options)`
Accepts an options object and returns a new `MetricsManager` object.

* `options` -- Object. All options are required.
    * `log`: A [bunyan](https://github.com/trentm/node-bunyan) logger.
    * `restify`: Restify library. Support is only guaranteed for version 4.x.
    * `staticLabels`: An object that includes labels to be attached to every collector.
        * `datacenter`: String, datacenter name.
        * `instance`: String, instance UUID.
        * `port`: Number, optional, metrics server port. Helpful when multiple instances of a service are running in the same zone.
        * `server`: String, server UUID.
        * `service`: String, service name.
    * `address`: String, the metrics server address.
    * `port`: Number, the metrics server port.

#### `MetricsManager.listen(callback)`
Starts the metrics server.

Parameters
* callback -- Function to run after the server has started

#### `MetricsManager.close(callback)`
Stops the metrics server.

Parameters
* callback -- Function to run after the server has stopped.

#### `MetricsManager.createMetrics(name, collectMetrics)`
Creates a group of metrics.

Parameters
* name -- String, a name to reference the metrics group.
* collectMetrics -- Function, accepts an arbitrary number of arguments and handles metric collection for the metrics group.

#### `MetricsManager.collectMetrics(name, ...args)`
Collects metrics for a metrics group.

Parameters
* name -- String, the name of the metrics group.
* ...args -- An arbitrary number of arguments to be passed to the `collectMetrics` function specified in `createMetrics`.

#### `MetricsManager.createNodejsMetrics()`

Important: These metrics are considered experimental/uncommitted. The specific
metrics exposed are expected to change without separate notice. Do not be
surprised if you build things relying on this data when some keys disappear in a
future version, keys are renamed, or new metrics are added.

Running this function adds several metrics indicating internal state of the node
process. These include currently:

* nodejs_V8_heap_size_executable_bytes
* nodejs_V8_heap_size_limit_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_available_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_heap_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_total_physical_size_bytes
* nodejs_V8_used_heap_size_bytes
* nodejs_active_handles_count
* nodejs_active_requests_count
* nodejs_eventloop_lag_seconds_total
* nodejs_eventloop_max_lag_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_max_tick_count
* nodejs_eventloop_max_time_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_min_lag_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_min_tick_count
* nodejs_eventloop_min_time_seconds
* nodejs_eventloop_samples_total
* nodejs_eventloop_tick_count_total
* nodejs_eventloop_time_seconds_total
* nodejs_gc_execution_count_total
* nodejs_gc_pause_seconds_total
* nodejs_memory_external_bytes
* nodejs_memory_heapTotal_bytes
* nodejs_memory_heapUsed_bytes
* nodejs_memory_rss_bytes
* nodejs_process_start_time_seconds
* nodejs_system_cpu_seconds_total
* nodejs_user_cpu_seconds_total

#### `MetricsManager.createRestifyMetrics()`
Adds a `restify` metrics group that includes common metrics to be collected from a Restify server -- a [counter](lib/metrics-manager.js#L119) to track http requests and a [histogram](lib/metrics-manager.js#L124) to track the time to process requests

#### `MetricsManager.collectRestifyMetrics(req, res, route)`
Collects `restify` metrics. Typically called in the "after" hook of a restify server.

Parameters
* req -- Restify request object.
* res -- Restify response object.
* route -- Restify route object.

These collectors collect the following metrics
* http_requests_completed
* http_request_duration_seconds

Both metrics add the following labels:
* method (e.g. 'PUT')
* status_code (e.g. 200)
* route (e.g. 'listvms')
* user_agent (only the first token e.g. restify/1.5.2) 

#### `MetricsManager.addPreCollectFunc(function (callback))`

Adds a function with the signature `function (callback)` to the list of
functions that will be called just before collecting the metrics. This is
intended to be used for things like `gauge.set(value)` to set a value just
before collection in cases where setting the value constantly might be otherwise
expensive.

The function provided *must* call callback() when completed *with no arguments*.

#### `MetricsManager#collector`
Artedi collector. Each metric needs to be added to this collector


# Development

There is automated code formatting (using `eslint --fix` and `prettier`):

    make fmt

There is lint/style checking (using `eslint` and `prettier --list-different`):

    make check

Please be sure to run all of the above prior to submitting changes. One
easy way to remember that is to run the following once for a clone to run
them automatically prior to `git commit`:

    make git-hooks

To run the test suite:

    make test
